[Music]
hello and welcome to the 24th episode of
top cast and today we're talking about
chapter 11 at the beginning of infinity
the multiverse there's been two preamble
chapters to this or two preamble
episodes to this to try and help you
understand some of the evidence some of
the experiments that come to bear on why
it is that we endorse the multiverse as
the best way of understanding quantum
theory although those of us who've
endorsed the multiverse don't see a
difference between quantum theory and
the multiverse the multiverse is Geoff's
realism just taking literally what the
formalism in quantum theory says and
what the experiments are telling us now
I'm trying a little experiment today the
previous episode was highly edited it
contained lots of videos and bells and
whistles and that kind of thing and it
was difficult to edit it took a lot far
longer to edit than it took to shoot now
some people have given me feedback very
valuable feedback and I love the
feedback you have any feedback about
this one please comment in the YouTube
video send me an email or contact me on
Twitter I'll certainly take it on board
because this time around I'm going to
reduce the amount of editing so it'll be
a little bit more conversational a
little bit more relaxed I'll refer to
notes far less but we are going to
actually read from the book this time
and also I've been advertising the
donate button on my website
www.ihaveaspergers.webs.com
five altogether and trying to explain
the multiverse it is a powerful argument
as I've said before in this chapter in
the beginning of infinity but it takes
some unpacking as I said there'll be far
less editing in this video this audio
but some of some of the editing is
editing is unavoidable simply because I
either make complete and utter mistakes
or I just need a drink of water and you
don't need to hear that
okay so David writes right at the
beginning of chapter 11
quote the idea of a doppelganger a
double of a person is a frequent theme
of science fiction
for instance the classical television
series Star Trek featured several types
of doppelganger story involving
malfunctions of the transporter the
starships teleportation device normally
used for short-range space travel since
teleporting something is conceptually
similar to making a copy of it at a
different location one can imagine
various ways in which the process could
go wrong and somehow end up with two
instances of each passenger the original
and the copy sometimes the doppelganger
is not copied from an original but
exists from the outset in a parallel
universe in some stories there is a rift
between universes through which one can
communicate or even travel to meet one's
doppelganger in others the universes
remain mutually imperceptible in which
case the interest of the story or rather
two stories is in how events are
affected by the differences between them
for instance the movie sliding doors
interleaves two variants of a love story
following the fortunes of two instances
of the same couple in two universes
which initially differ only in one small
detail in a related genres
known as alternate history one of the
two stories need not be told explicitly
because it is part of our own history
and is assumed to be known to the
audience for example the novel
fatherland by Robert Harris is about a
universe in which Germany won the Second
World War Robert Silverberg
Marama returner it's won about is about
one in which the Roman Empire did not
fall our pause there end quote the man
in the high castle that's a recent one I
think it was on Amazon Prime it went for
two seasons precisely about the
alternative universe in which Natsu
and Imperial Japan indeed won the second
world war and it's a society setting not
quite modern-day I don't think but a
society where those two where those two
empires basically took over the world
and importantly um I took over the
United States and that was sort of
divided down the middle one part run by
Germany in one part run by Japan okay
let's keep going David writes quote in
another class of stories the transporter
malfunction accidentally exhales to
passengers to a phantom zone where they
imperceptible to everyone in the
ordinary world but can see and hear them
and each other so they have the
distressing experience of yelling
indistinct it's who are oblivious and
walk right through them in some stories
it is only copies the travelers that are
sent to a Phantom Zone
unbeknown to the originals such a story
may end with the exhaust discovering
they can after all have some effect on
the ordinary world they use that effect
to signal their existence and are
rescued through a reversal the process
that exiled them depending on the
picture depending on the fictional
science that has been supposed they then
may begin new lives as separate people
or they may merge with their originals
the letter option violates the principle
of a conservation of mass among other
laws of physics but again this is
fiction nevertheless there is a certain
category of rather pedantic science
fiction enthusiasts myself included who
prefer the fictional science to make
sense to consist of reasonably good
explanations imagining worlds with
different laws of physics one thing
imagining worlds that do not make sense
in their own terms is quite another for
instance we want to know how it can be
that the Exiles can see and hear the
ordinary world but not touch it pause
there end quote and I'm the same for
example one of the first I'm of an age
where here one of the first great
blockbuster movies that took my interest
of Star Wars I love Star Wars but I
quickly realized that it was fantasy and
not true science fiction I was a science
nerd I suppose early on in life loved
astronomy and I understood what a parsec
was so in Han Solo said the Millennium
Falcon the spaceship could
the Kessel run in less than 12 parsecs
that didn't make sense and then in
Episode one of Star Wars in 1997 ish
when that was released many of us Star
Wars fans were utterly the fuddled
confused and disappointed that George
Lucas tried to explain the scientific
basis of the force to me the force was
just magic it served the same role that
you know Gandalf staff did in Lord of
the Rings
there was nothing scientific about the
force and nor should one try and make
something scientific about the force but
he did he tried to explain it there were
these little bacteria these little life
forms inside of every cell called
midi-chlorians and these things somehow
mediated the messages between the force
and the user of the force like the Jedi
I heard Yoda talking about
midi-chlorians I've been wondering what
are midi-chlorians
midi-chlorians are a microscopic
life-form that resides within all living
cells they live inside me inside
yourselves yes and we are simians with
them symbionts life-forms living
together for mutual advantage
without the midi-chlorians life could
not exist we would have no knowledge of
the force they continually speak to us
telling us the will of the force when
you learn to quiet your mind we leave
them speaking deal
I don't understand the time and training
any you know you know we should treat
fantasy as fantasy treated as a universe
with completely different laws of
physics rather than try and show how the
fantasy elements of things like Star
Wars can actually make sense they need
not make sense in that universe okay and
we're not told what kind of universe
were supposed to be in namely a universe
different from ours then we won't be
disappointed with the explanations I've
never needed an explanation in the Star
Wars universe as to why the laser bolts
from the gun travels so slowly fast
lower than normal bullets you can see
them travel through the air and moreover
I've never been concerned about the fact
there is sound in space in Star Wars
it's a different fictional fantasy
universe that doesn't worry me but if it
purports to be our universe obeying our
laws then yes it's disappointing so for
example when Superman's cape flaps in
the wind on the moon when he is visiting
the astronauts that's intolerable that
shouldn't happen nor should he be able
to speak on the moon as well but he does
okay let's keep going in this petty
antigua vain david writes quote this
attitude of ours was nicely parodied in
an episode of the television series The
Simpsons in which fans are a fantasy
series question its star star next
question fan yes over here in episode bf
12 you were battling barbarians while
riding a wing at Appaloosa you're in the
very next scene my dear you are clearly
atop a winged Arabian pleased to explain
it star ah yeah well wherever you notice
something like that a wizard did it fan
all right I see yes but in Episode a g4
star Wizard fan all four Glaven out loud
and Glaven is something that we don't
understand the meaning of I'll continue
because that is a parody the fan is
complaining not about the story itself
but there is a continuity
era two horses were used at different
times to play the role of a single
fictional horse nevertheless there are
such things as flawed stories end quote
just my reflection on that I won't read
the next part here basically David's
pointing out that if you do have a
flawed story often it comes down to a
wizard did it kind of thing and so
you're not being given an explanation
you're being you're having something
explained away told don't ask this
question because it's magic
a wizard has done it it's and very easy
to very explanation and so even in terms
of the fictional world itself it can be
a bad explanation so skipping a
substantial part there and then David
writes in that spirit then consider the
fictional doppelgangers in the Phantom
Zone what enables them to see the
ordinary world since they are
structurally identical to the originals
their eyes work by absorbing life and
detecting the resulting chemical changes
just as realized - but if they absorb
some of the light coming from the
ordinary world then they must cast
shadows at the places where that light
would otherwise have arrived
also if the Exiles and the Phantom Zone
can see each other what light are they
seeing with the phantom zones own light
if so where does it come from pause
there my reflection you know they
remember my father telling me about I
think was a movie old movie the The
Invisible Man and he would always try to
explain to me why the Invisible Man
would actually be blind because he's not
absorbing any light if you have a true
Invisible Man underground in fact I
think there's a it's a modern-day
version of the invisible man that's on
right now showing right now in 2020 he
should be blind he or she should be
blind if you're invisible if you're
completely invisible because your eyes
will allow all the light to pass through
them it's not capturing any light
whatsoever it's not doing what light
should do namely be absorbed by the
retina and if the stop being absorbed by
the retina because it's perfectly
transparent then indeed the Invisible
Man will be blind and all people in the
Phantom Zone will be blind and if
they're not blind then I must receiving
light from somewhere and that must be
Phantom Zone light as well skipping a
bit and then David writes it seems that
almost everything you
leaves phantom zone stories that happens
in the story not only conflicts with the
real laws of physics which is
unexceptional in fiction but raises
problems with the fictional explanation
if the doppelgangers can walk through
people in these stories why do they not
fall through the floor
in reality a floor supports people by
bending slightly but if it were to bend
in the story it would also vibrate with
their steps and set off sound waves
which people in the ordinary world could
hear so there must be a separate floor
and walls as well as an entire spaceship
hull in the Phantom Zone even the space
outside cannot be ordinary space because
if one could get back into ordinary
space by leaving the ship then the
Exiles could return by that route but
there is an entire phantom zone space
but if there is an entire phantom zone
space out there a parallel universe how
could a mere transporter malfunction
have created that we should not be
surprised that good fictional science is
hard to invent it is a variant of real
science and real scientific knowledge is
very hard to very pause there just
skipping a substantial part and getting
straight into more of the meat of the
matter when it comes to quantum theory
because David is going to explain
quantum theory of our fictional story
and so there's some explanation about
the tactic that he is using here and
then he goes on to write quite quantum
theory is the deepest explanation known
to science it violates many of the
assumptions of common sense and all of
previous science including some that no
one suspected were being made at all
until quantum theory came along and
contradicted them and yet this seemingly
alien territory is the reality of which
we and everything we experience are part
there is no other so in setting a story
there perhaps what I lose in terms of
the familiar ingredients of drama I
shall gain in terms of opportunity to
explain something that is more
astounding than any fiction yet is the
purest and most basic fact we know about
the physical world I'd better warn the
reader that the can't die shall give
known as the many universes
interpretation of quantum theory rather
inadequately since there is much more to
it than universes remains at the time of
writing and decidedly minority of you
among physicists in the next chapter I
shall speculate why that is so despite
the fact that men
well studied phenomena have no other
known explanation for the moment suffice
it to say the very idea of Sciences
explanation in the sense that I am
advocating in this book namely an
account of what is really out there its
itself still a minority view even among
theoretical physicists pause there my
reflection firstly notice how I just
paused and normally I would edit that
out and try and say that again so this
is one of the things that I'm asking
people to give me feedback on would you
prefer I just reread that rather than
you know stumbling over my words and
David does say there that this idea of
scientist explanation is itself still a
minority view even among theoretical
physicists yeah it seems to me that it
is primarily a problem among theoretical
physicists it's the theoretical
physicists that seem to deny that what
physics in this particular case is
telling us about reality shouldn't be
taken seriously that we don't need to
explain what's actually happening and
that we can just be there for
instrumentalists when it comes to things
like quantum theory I mentioned this in
the previous two episodes it's not so
much a problem for ornithologists people
who study birds they tend to be realists
about the fact that birds exist and
birds evolved and have common ancestors
with people it's not really seemingly a
problem for geologists or people who
want to try and find something like oil
in the ground using radar techniques or
gravity metro electric analysis these
people are realists about where the oil
is and the fact that rocks exist and you
have to bash through them pestle
scientists it really is a problem at the
very edge of our understanding the most
fundamental theories about science it's
there it seems to me the philosophy
somewhat changes in people's minds they
cease to be realists about the things
that they're studying when it comes to
science there's also of course a sense
in which there is this folk relativism
as well that many people have when you
ask them what they really know exists
they deny really knowing that anything
absolutely exists ok
especially educated people and the more
educated people become the
more skeptical they come about
straightforward realism and the fact
that science explains reality it doesn't
even have the final word but it explains
aspects of reality and you're entitled
to say electrons really exist and people
really exist and birds really exist and
so on that's what realism is and that's
what science is explanation is all about
if something appears unavoidably in our
best explanation then that entity exists
this is explained very well in the
fabric of reality by the way so I'll say
that again we know something exists if
it appears in our best explanations now
some people object to this they say well
well then if our best explanation
changes that means that what you said
existed before no longer exists yes yes
I find that a fairly mundane claim
knowing something exists is not knowing
something absolutely once and for all
finally exists and there can be no
change in your knowledge about the
existence of that thing okay whether
something exists in some final ultimate
sense is not knowable just like it's in
some final sense we cannot know the
final laws of physics or the final
ultimate knowledge about everything we
won't get there we're at the beginning
of infinity so instead we have to
interpret the word existence as being
about the contents of our best current
explanations it's not an infallible
criteria when we're talking about
existence so that's the only remark I'll
make on that and I think that your
typical scientists the further they get
away from theoretical physics
they tend to be realists about their own
field I have a friend who is a marine
biologist I've never heard him deny the
fact that squid the exists he studies
squid he knows that the squids exist and
he's quite happy to say I know that
squids exist on the other hand the
theoretical physicist does tend to deny
the reality of what things like the
Schrodinger wave equation tell us about
really anyway I digress
let me return to the book David writes
let me begin with perhaps the simplest
possible parallel universe speculation a
phantom zone has a
stirred all along ever since its own Big
Bang until our story begins it has been
an exact doppelganger of the entire
universe Adam for Adam an event for
event all the flaws that I mentioned in
the Phantom Zone stories devote all the
floors and all the floors that I
mentioned in the Phantom Zone stories
derived from the asymmetry that things
in the ordinary world affect things in
the Phantom Zone but not vice versa
so let me eliminate those floors by
imagining for a moment that the
universes are completely imperceptible
to each other since we are heading
towards real physics
let me also retain the speed of light
limit on communication and let the laws
of physics be universal and symmetrical
ie
they make no distinction between the
universes moreover they are
deterministic nothing random ever
happens which is why the universes have
remained alike so far how can they ever
become different this is a key question
in the theory of the multiverse which I
shall answer below all these basic
properties of my fictional world can be
thought of as conditions on the flow of
information one cannot send a message to
the other universe nor can one change
anything in one's own universe sooner
than light could reach that thing nor
can one bring new information even
random information into the world
everything that happens is determined by
the laws of physics from what has gone
before however one can of course bring
new knowledge into the world knowledge
consists of explanations and none of
those conditions prevents the creation
of new explanations all this is true of
the real world to pause there
end quote here is my controversial take
on that it's not controversial to me but
it's something some discussions I've
been engaged in recently discussions
that go back some two decades about this
particular thing all those things that
David said there are quite true so for
example everything that happens is
determined by the laws of physics from
what has gone before
so the Turman ISM is real every event is
absolutely determined by the laws of
physics but
to assume that it is the past that
determines the future is just a bias
because the laws of physics are
symmetric in time one mayor's will say
the future determines the past state as
well so you can take any future state
apply the laws of physics in Reverse and
end up with that past state everything
is determined doesn't privilege what
thing in time determines what other
thing in time because you can reverse
the laws of physics they are symmetric
the laws of motion are symmetric okay
the one thing that can be brought into
this world but new information can't be
brought into this world however new
knowledge can be brought into this world
by creative people and the essence of
new knowledge created by creative people
that seem somewhat redundant and
circular but it's true that people are
creative they create new knowledge is
that that new knowledge is impossible to
predict ahead of time were it possible
to predict what knowledge someone was
going to create then that knowledge
would be had at the time of the
prediction and thus it would not be a
genuine creation of that knowledge but
knowledge really is created and has a
causal effect in the world and it cannot
be predicted not only because it's super
complex or the David is going to explain
how that is one factor but I would say
we simply do not know the process by
which knowledge creation occurs we have
some ideas popper and epistemology gives
us some ideas that it is this process of
conjecture and refutation but how new
conjectures are arrived at what the
process is that goes on inside the mind
of a person in order to create this new
explanatory knowledge we don't know it's
a black box for now it could very well
be it could very well be that it remains
some kind of black box there is some
certainly principle that controls
creativity
I'm just conjecturing us I'm just
throwing this out there I'm not saying
that I believe it I'm saying it's a
possibility
that it will be it will turn out to be
inherently impossible to predict
knowledge creation there'll be some
principle that prohibits us from
predicting what knowledge a person will
create it's inherently unpredictable and
if it's inherently unpredictable then we
have to rely then although it's
determined by the laws of physics
everything is determined by the laws of
physics this does not rule out free will
because free will is intrinsically
coupled to this idea of creating new
knowledge that if you have a decision to
make in your life where apparently you
only have two choices the human mind is
such that it can create new options
options that weren't there before and
although you might be told you can have
tea or coffee and this is the classic
freewill thought experiment whether you
have tea or coffee might have been
determined prior to your making the
choice about tea or coffee but now if
you're someone like me who endorses the
idea of freewill as a real thing I would
say you can't even say that it's a 50/50
chance you can't even say that the
person will choose to your coffee the
person might not want either the person
might choose to drink neither the person
might choose to mix them together the
person might choose to invent a new
drink altogether all of these things
though consistent with the laws of
physics cannot be predicted ahead of
time this is what freewill is about it
has something to do with creatively
generating new options that weren't
there previously and so I call this a
merging feature of reality the fact that
the fact that people are unique in this
regard
people are unique in this regard and
cosmically important in large part for
this reason that they bring new options
into the world that they can create new
explanations and those new explanations
gives them a wider repertoire of ways in
which to control the world they find
them
sells in and control the environment
that they find themselves in and so
attempting to prophesy things into the
distant future is near impossible we can
have some crude estimates based upon
current knowledge about what's going to
happen into the distant future but
invariably that will be wrong because we
haven't been able to take account of
human creativity is everything to
determine whether laws of physics
absolutely do we know what all the laws
of physics are and the most fundamental
laws of physics that exists no will we
ever know could any of these laws of
physics have anything whatever to do
with creative conjectures perhaps and
perhaps some of them will tell us why it
is that we can't predict ahead of time
what is going to happen if you can't
predict ahead of time what is going to
happen when a person is involved then
that's what free will basically amounts
to although it's determined it's not
predictable say it again
although something might be determined
that has nothing to do with whether from
the perspective as a single person or an
entire civilization whether that thing
is predictable and if it's not
predictable despite being in determined
we have a form of compatibilism here
unpredictability and determinism and
what I think when that situation arises
in the context of creative expression by
people we have something that we may as
well call freewill because it's serving
all the functions that classical
freewill serves now I need to clarify
something on that point about people
being unique in bringing knowledge into
the world and so the fact that they
create knowledge means that it's
unpredictable what's going to happen
into the distant future because of the
fact it's a genuine act of creation
despite the fact everything obeys the
laws of physics the laws of physics are
the thing that allow even mandate
perhaps that this creative act of
knowledge production can actually occur
in the minds of human beings what I want
to clarify is explanatory knowledge is
not the only kind of knowledge that can
be brought into the universe there is
another kind that we have mentioned here
on top
caste and that we have read about from
the beginning of infinity that other
kind of knowledge is of course
evolutionary knowledge or genetic
knowledge knowledge that is in the DNA
knowledge that enables organisms to
survive in certain environments into
eating in given environments and in fact
it's a nice parallel really a biologist
would be able to explain how it is that
we cannot predict what can't what
animals what specific species are going
to evolve in particular niches you can
guess you can have an approximate
understanding that well if you find a
particular biological niche then a
certain kind of organism might be
expected to fill that niche in some way
I think I think Darwin himself Charles
Darwin made a kind of prediction given
that there was a certain kind of orchid
that existed which had a very long stem
that was very difficult for any insect
who actually reached down to get the
nectar from the bottom of that orchid
and so he postulated there should be a
moth out there somewhere with a very
long proboscis a very long you know kind
of insect beak thing that could get down
into that orchid and so he did indeed
make a kind of evolutionary prediction
but it's not a prediction in the same
way that physics makes predictions after
all evolution is blind and this
evolution is blind claim is quite true
that means we can't really predict
what's going to happen next because
although there might be certain niches
where we would expect the coevolution of
two organisms given any particular
environment it's going to be extremely
difficult indeed to try and figure out
what kind of organisms might actually
specifically arise in those environments
if we were alien biologists and we tried
to predict for example given no other
information other than what the physical
environment of the continent of
Australia was like and the physical
environment of what the continent of
Africa is like they're both quite
similar both hot rather dry places it
would be very difficult to figure out
that the Kangaroos evolved in one place
and the lion's evolved in another place
I don't think that biology is I would do
that kind of prediction and that's the
way in which evolution is creative it's
able to bring these organisms into being
to fill niches
what specific kind of organism fills a
particular physical niche that's
unpredictable and it's it's a form of
creativity it's a form of knowledge
creation by evolution equally determined
by the laws of physics but the laws of
physics determine in the sense that
allow for evolution to proceed 11
evolution to occur so evolution brings
knowledge into existence so to do people
the difference is that people bring into
existence explanatory type knowledge and
this explanatory knowledge is inherently
unpredictable and allows us to change
the environment in which we find
ourselves
to understand the environment and to
control it so yeah just a quick
clarification on that point there are
indeed two kinds of knowledge
explanatory and evolutionary okay let's
some keep on going that was a massive
diversion and David writes we can we can
temporarily think of the two universes
as being literally parallel supress the
third dimension of space and think of a
universe as being two-dimensional like
an infinitely flat television then place
the second such television parallel to
it showing exactly the same pictures
symbolizing the objects in the two
universes now forget the material on
which now forget the material of which
the televisions are made only the
pictures exist this is to stress that a
universe is not a receptacle containing
physical objects it is those objects in
real physics even spaces a physical
object capable of warping and affecting
matter and being affected by it now we
have two perfectly parallel identical
universes each including an instance of
our starship its crew in its transporter
and of the whole of space because of the
symmetry between them it is now
misleading to call one of them the
ordinary universe and the other the
Phantom Zone
so I shall just call them the multiverse
so I should just call them universes the
two of them together which comprise the
whole of physical reality in the story
so far are the multiverse similarly it
is misleading to speak of the original
object in its doppelganger
they are - they are simply the two
instances of each object if our science
fiction speculation were to stop there
the two universes will have to
identical forever there's nothing
logically impossible about that you know
would make our story fatally flawed both
his fiction and a scientific speculation
and for the same reason it is a story of
two universes but only one history that
is to say there is only one script about
what is really there in both universes
consider this fiction therefore it is
really a single universe story and a
pointless disguise consider the
scientific explanation considered as
scientific speculation it describes a
world that would not be explicable to
its inhabitants for how could they ever
argue that their history takes place in
two universes and not three or thirty
one up to today and 30 tomorrow moreover
since their world has only one history
all their good explanations about the
nature would be about that history that
single history would be what they meant
by their world or universe nothing of
the underlying tunas of the reality
would be accessible to them nor would it
make any more sense to them as an
explanation then would three nurse or 13
Asst yet they would be factually
mistaken a remark about explanation
although the story so far would be a bad
explanation from the inhabitants point
of view it is not necessarily bad from
hours imagining inexplicable worlds can
help us to understand the nature of
explica bility I've already imagined
some explicable worlds for that very
reason in previous chapters and I shall
imagine more in this chapter but in the
end I want to tell of an explicable
world and it will be ours a remark about
terminology the world is the whole of
physical reality in classical pre
quantum physics the world was thought to
consist of one universe something like a
whole 3-dimensional space for the whole
of time and all its contents according
to quantum physics as I shall explain
the world is much larger and more
complicated object the multiverse which
includes many such universes among other
things and history is the sequence of
events happening to objects and possibly
their identical counterparts so in my
story so far the world is a multiverse
that consists of two universes but has
only one single history so where two
universes must not stay identical
something like a transporter malfunction
will have to make them different yet as
I said that may seem to have been ruled
out by those restrictions on information
flow the laws of physics and the
fictional multiverse are deterministic
and symmetrical so what can the
transporter possibly do that would make
the two universes differ they may say in
the whatever
one instance of it does to one universe
its doppelganger must be doing to the
other so the universes can only remain
the same surprisingly that is not so it
is consistent for two identical entities
to become different under deterministic
and symmetrical laws pause there
end quote for the moment just a little
reflection of why this is just like the
half silvered mirror in the mark gender
interferometer that we talked about in
the last episode this is where although
the laws of physics are deterministic in
symmetrical nonetheless you could have a
situation where a photon can strike a
half-silvered mirror and 50% of the time
it will go through and 50% of the time
will bounce off and in fact in the real
multiverse what we have is in that
situation 50% of all electrons that's
all photons rather that strike that half
silvered mirror will go through or
fungible copies of this one electron
will go through and 50% will bounce off
and so although you have symmetrical
deterministic laws there's two different
possible outcomes that causes the
universes to become different when you
have that capacity for differentiation
symmetrical deterministic laws can cause
different things to happen and it really
happens in real life
I've voltage surge for example such as
David has in his fictional story it
could be something like well just by
chance chant I say chance but due to the
laws of physics an electron can have
different energies as it orbits a
nucleus in fact it could have so much
energy at ionizes and this effectively
is a spark on an atomic scale ionized
means the electron leaves the atom now
as it leaves the atom it could strike
other electrons and have a cascading
effect and causing other electrons to be
higher knives from their atoms and then
you do get a real-life little spark this
could be how the malfunction er the now
function in the transporter works okay
so I'll just continue for a little
longer and then I'll stop you having not
read too much just as an experiment
remember I want people's feedback on
whether you think the lack of editing in
this episode is a better or a worse
thing okay continuing quote David writes
but for that to happen they must
initially be more than just exact images
of each other
they must be fungible by which I mean
identical and literally every way except
that there are two of them the concept
of fungibility is going to be is going
to appear repeatedly in my story the
term is borrowed from legal terminology
we're a first at a legal fiction that
deems certain entities to be identical
for purposes such as paying debts for
example dollar bills are fungible in law
which means that unless otherwise agreed
borrowing a dollar does not require one
to return the specific bank note that
one borrowed barrels of oil a given
grade are fungible two horses are not
borrowing someone's horse means that one
has to return that specific horse even
it's identical twin will not do but the
physical fungibility I'm referring to
here is not about deeming it means being
identical and that is very different and
a counterintuitive property Leibnitz in
his doctrine of the identity of
indiscernibles went so far as to rule
out its existence on principle but he
was mistaken even aside from the physics
of the multiverse we now know that
photons and under some conditions even
atoms can be fungible this is achieved
in lasers and in devices called atomic
lasers as respectively the latter emit
bursts of extremely cold fungible atoms
for how this is possible without causing
transmutation explosions and so on see
below and quote just pause here I
noticed there's a third meaning of
fungible and people have been using this
increasingly more especially in
economics and for audio-only listeners
I'm just drawing your attention to on
the video version I'm showing you the
third definition from the
merriam-webster dictionary which says
that the definition of fungible is
readily changeable to new situations it
now seems to me to have been perverted
to mean just similar or transferable I
heard on a podcast for example recently
someone talking about how car
manufacturing recently has stopped in
Australia and there was some talk about
creating an industry of jet fighters and
without getting into politics oh but the
the commentators were there we're
talking about how the skills of the car
builders may have been fungible for
aircraft building now they made explicit
they didn't think that this meant the
skills were exactly the same but rather
just transferable that you could move
the skills from building cars to
building jets right or wrong in terms of
the terminology that's a weakening of
this term of fungibility where it just
means similar approximately the same
good enough this is completely unlike
what David is talking about where it
kind of means more identical than
identical because it means identical
copies in exactly the same places doing
exactly the same thing ok ok I'll just
read a little bit more David writes
quote you will not find the concept of
fungibility discussed or even mention in
many textbooks or research papers on
quantum theory even the small minority
that endorsed the many universes
interpretation nevertheless it is
everywhere just beneath the conceptual
surface and I believe that making it
explicit helps to explain quantum
phenomena without fudging as will become
clear it is even weirder and attribute
than Leibnitz guessed much weirder than
multiple universes for instance which
are after all just common sense repeated
it allows radically new types of motion
and information flow different from
anything that was imagined before
quantum physics and hence a radically
different structure of the physical
world pause there end quote and that's
where I'll end the reading for today yes
so we're getting a hint here now that
the multiple universes aspect of quantum
theory of the multiverse is not the most
amazing thing this concept of
fungibility really is the most were one
of the more amazing things not only are
photons electrons and other subatomic
particles fungible and they're are
fungible instances vandamm according to
quantum theory but you yourself a person
contains many instances fungible
instances right now
perhaps uncountably infinite what does
it feel like to be uncountably infinite
numbers of fungible instances of a
person exactly as it feels like to you
right now what does it feel like to
differentiate into two different copies
exactly as it feels like now okay we
have to understand reality as it is now
we don't know what it would feel like to
split and then merge again although that
might happen because we don't have sense
organs for that but perhaps in the epic
and episode next or the one after that
I'll explain the experiment that David
has proposed to differentiate between
this multiverse conception of quantum
theory the realist conception versus
other conceptions of quantum theory the
other conceptions of quantum theory are
far more to my mind counterintuitive
illogical even those interpretations say
that all of the universes disappear
except for one when being observed in
other words the power of the human mind
of consciousness is what causes the
collapse of the wavefunction but we'll
talk about that in a future episode for
now thank you for listening and do let
me know via whatever means if you
preferred this style slightly more
relaxed more conversational mean not
referring to notes very often stumbling
over my words in places possibly not
sounding as refined as what I did in
previous episodes what do you prefer
because moving forward I'll be taking
people's ideas on board to some extent
until then bye
[Music]